                                                                                           Review of International Studies (2025), 51: 4, 686–706
                                                                                           doi:10.1017/S0260210525000087


                                                                                           RESEARCH ARTICLE


                                                                                           Playing doomsday: Video games and the politics of
                                                                                           nuclear weapons
                                                                                           Carolina Pantoliano
                                                                                           School of Social & Political Sciences, College of Social Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
                                                                                           Email: carolina.pantolianopanico@glasgow.ac.uk

                                                                                           (Received 4 April 2024; revised 14 November 2024; accepted 26 January 2025)


                                                                                              Abstract
                                                                                              This article examines how nuclear weapons are depicted in video games. While the literature has explored
                                                                                              the social and symbolic meanings of nuclear weapons and how they have been represented in popular cul-
                                                                                              ture, existing accounts have not thoroughly engaged with video games. Examining the bestselling game Call
                                                                                              of Duty, I show how gameplay narratives contribute to normalising dominant knowledge about nuclear
                                                                                              weapons. The overarching argument advanced in this article is that representations of nuclear weapons
                                                                                              in video games contribute to legitimising the ongoing possession and modernisation of nuclear weapons.
                                                                                              Drawing on feminist post-structuralist theory, I show how nuclear weapons are programmed to be an
                                                                                              exclusive item that only the most skilled players can obtain, reinforcing the exclusionary power dynam-
                                                                                              ics sustaining the nuclear status quo. Moreover, I show how game dynamics produce nuclear weapons
                                                                                              as a win-condition, and thus a symbol of power and success that reinforces dominant understandings of
                                                                                              their military value while masking the horror of killing. Deconstructing the playing dimension of video
                                                                                              games, I situate the ludic aspect as a meaning-making system, working synergically with gameplay stories
                                                                                              to reinforce dominant knowledge about nuclear weapons. Ultimately, the article draws attention to everyday
                                                                                              discursive mechanisms that render a nuclear world possible.


                                                                                           Keywords: nuclear disarmament; nuclear weapons; popular culture; post-structuralism; the politics of play; video games



                                                                                           Introduction
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           The inspiration to write this article came from an interesting conversation with my neighbour’s five-
                                                                                           year-old daughter. The little girl and other kids from nearby houses were playing outside when I
                                                                                           overheard her say, ‘Careful, I have a nuke!’ during what appeared to be a classic game of tag. As a
                                                                                           scholar interested in the politics of nuclear weapons, I was intrigued by the fact that a five-year-old
                                                                                           used the word ‘nuke’ to deter others from approaching her. I noticed that the other kids reacted
                                                                                           with a mix of excitement and confusion; some expressed fear and ran away, and others said they
                                                                                           had secret weapons too. Later that day, I went to my neighbour’s house and asked if I could talk to
                                                                                           the girl to understand her knowledge and expectations about nuclear weapons. When I asked her
                                                                                           what a nuke was, she told me it was ‘the most powerful bomb’ and that those with it ‘win the game’.
                                                                                           Subsequently, I asked where she had heard the word nuke and how she knew it was a bomb. The
                                                                                           little girl told me it was part of a game called Call of Duty that her brother played with friends online.
                                                                                           ‘If you are good enough in the game, you get a nuke, and once you drop the nuke, you win’, she
                                                                                           told me. Inspired by this episode, I decided to research how nuclear weapons are depicted in video
                                                                                           games. I am particularly interested in exploring the narratives conveyed through this medium and
                                                                                           examining how they shape expectations and reinforce specific realities about nuclear weapons.

                                                                                           © The Author(s), 2025. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of The British International Studies Association. This is an Open
                                                                                           Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which
                                                                                           permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
                                                                                                                                                                            Review of International Studies             687


                                                                                               Popular culture has gained considerable prominence in the discipline of International Relations
                                                                                           (IR), with many scholars recognising its relevance to make sense of global politics.1 Scholars have
                                                                                           drawn attention to how TV shows, films, books, music, and magazines are products as well as
                                                                                           productive of expectations in the social domain, functioning as discursive referent points of a par-
                                                                                           ticular reality.2 Others have examined how popular culture is vital to understanding how ‘power,
                                                                                           ideology, and identity’ are constituted.3 Those examining the discursive role of video games in
                                                                                           perpetuating and normalising expectations in social practice focus on how this cultural artefact
                                                                                           offers a singular vehicle for producing, reiterating, and challenging knowledge.4 The reconfigura-
                                                                                           bility of play, along with the incentives and prizes, can create a range of possibilities in which the
                                                                                           player actively engages in debates and experiences.5 While the literature on video games and global
                                                                                           politics has examined representations that make visible as well as underscore assumptions about
                                                                                           how international politics operates,6 existing approaches have not paid sufficient attention to how
                                                                                           nuclear weapons are depicted and how such representations impact nuclear politics. Moreover,
                                                                                           the literature has been less attentive to the dimension of play as a distinct feature associated with
                                                                                           this medium that, together with what is being represented, has an impact on the production of
                                                                                           knowledge about nuclear weapons.
                                                                                               Building on feminist post-structuralist literature as well as the body of work examining the
                                                                                           importance of popular culture to make sense of global politics, I examine how gameplay narratives
                                                                                           contribute to normalising dominant knowledge about nuclear weapons. Focusing my interroga-
                                                                                           tions on the Call of Duty franchise, I argue that representations contribute to legitimising the
                                                                                           ongoing possession and modernisation of nuclear weapons. I show how nuclear weapons are
                                                                                           represented as an exclusive item that only the most skilled players can obtain, reinforcing the exclu-
                                                                                           sionary power relations sustaining the nuclear status quo. Moreover, I show how game dynamics
                                                                                           produce nuclear weapons as a win-condition, and thus a symbol of power and success that rein-
                                                                                           forces dominant understandings of their military value while masking the horror of killing. As I
                                                                                           delve into the workings of each of these narratives, I show how representations reproduce colonial
                                                                                           and gendered logics that make nuclear possession possible. Deconstructing the playing dimension

                                                                                             1
                                                                                                Roland Bleiker, ‘The aesthetic turn in international political theory’, Millennium: Journal of International Studies,
                                                                                           30:3 (2011), pp. 509–33; William Clapton and Laura J. Shepherd, ‘Lessons from Westeros: Gender and power
                                                                                           in Game of Thrones’, Politics, 37:1 (2017), pp. 5–18; Rhys Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe: Life and Death in
                                                                                           the Third Nuclear Age (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2023); Emily E. Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear narra-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           tives in contemporary television: The BBC’s Vigil’, Review of International Studies, 50:6 (2024), pp. 987–1003, avail-
                                                                                           able at: {https://doi.org/10.1017/S026021052300075X}; Kyle Grayson, Matt Davies, and Simon Philpott, ‘Pop goes IR?
                                                                                           Researching the popular culture world politics’, Continuum Politics, 29:3 (2009), pp. 155–63; Jutta Weldes, ‘Going
                                                                                           cultural: Star Trek, state action, and popular culture’, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 28:1 (1999),
                                                                                           pp. 117–34.
                                                                                              2
                                                                                                Tim Aistrope and Stefanie Fishel, ‘Horror, apocalypse and world politics’, International Affairs, 96:3 (2020), pp. 631–48;
                                                                                           Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe; Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear narratives in contemporary television’; Abigail E. Ruane and
                                                                                           Patrick P. James, ‘The International Relations of Middle-Earth: Learning from “The Lord of the Rings”’, International Studies
                                                                                           Perspectives, 9:4 (2008), pp. 377–94; Laura J. Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Popular Culture: Telling Stories (London:
                                                                                           Routledge, 2013); Hebatalla Taha, ‘Atomic aesthetics: Gender, visualization and popular culture in Egypt’, International Affairs,
                                                                                           98:4 (2022), pp. 1169–87; Weldes, ‘Going cultural’, p. 117.
                                                                                              3
                                                                                                Grayson, Davies, and Philpott, ‘Pop goes IR?’, p. 155.
                                                                                              4
                                                                                                Ian Bogost, ‘Comparative video game criticism’, Games and Culture, 1:1 (2006), pp. 44–6; Nicolas de Zamaróczy, ‘Are we
                                                                                           what we play? Global politics in historical strategy computer games’, International Studies Perspectives, 18:2 (2017), pp. 155–74;
                                                                                           Nick Robinson, ‘Videogames, persuasion and the War on Terror: Escaping or embedding the military entertainment complex?’,
                                                                                           Political Studies, 60:3 (2012), pp. 504–22; Nick Robinson, ‘Have you won the War on Terror? Military videogames and the state
                                                                                           of American exceptionalism’, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 43:2 (2015), pp. 450–70.
                                                                                              5
                                                                                                Craig Hayden, ‘The procedural rhetorics of Mass Effect: Video games as argumentation in International Relations’,
                                                                                           International Studies Perspectives, 18:2 (2017), pp. 175–93; Aggie Hirst, ‘Wargames resurgent: The hyperrealities of military
                                                                                           gaming from recruitment to rehabilitation’, International Studies Quarterly, 66:3 (2022), pp. 1–14.
                                                                                              6
                                                                                                Felix Ciută, ‘Call of Duty: Playing video games with IR’, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 44:2 (2016),
                                                                                           pp. 197–215; de Zamaróczy, ‘Are we what we play?’; Hayden, ‘The procedural rhetorics of Mass Effect’; Robinson, ‘Videogames,
                                                                                           persuasion and the War on Terror’, p. 175.
                                                                                           688       Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           of video games, I situate the ludic aspect as a system of meaning production, working synergically
                                                                                           with gameplay stories to reinforce dominant knowledge about nuclear weapons.
                                                                                               To do so, I examine Call of Duty games released between 2007 and 2023. Call of Duty is
                                                                                           a bestselling first-person shooter video game franchise published by Activision and developed
                                                                                           by Infinity Ward, Treyarch, Sledgehammer Games, and Raven Software. In its 20 years of exis-
                                                                                           tence, the series has sold over 425 million copies worldwide, making the franchise the fourth
                                                                                           bestselling game in history after Mario, Tetris, and Pokémon. Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II,
                                                                                           released in October 2022, made 1 billion dollars in 10 days.7 The first game was released in
                                                                                           2003 and focused on World War II, while subsequent titles were set in the Cold War, futur-
                                                                                           istic worlds, and modern-day conflict scenarios. Nuclear weapons have been part of the mul-
                                                                                           tiplayer game experience in Call of Duty since 2009 and continue to be a highly anticipated
                                                                                           feature.
                                                                                               Unlike most analyses published to date, my interrogations will focus on the multiplayer mode,
                                                                                           also known as battle royale. The choice to engage with the multiplayer mode is due to its popu-
                                                                                           larity among players, and therefore the opportunities this mode offers for reiterating knowledge.
                                                                                           It is also important to note that stories about nuclear weapons have mainly been told through this
                                                                                           mode of the game. Nonetheless, where nuclear weapons are depicted in the campaign mode, I
                                                                                           offer an analysis of how depictions reinforce and/or challenge some of the representations seen in
                                                                                           the multiplayer experience. The study draws upon 100 hours of multiplayer gameplay engagement
                                                                                           through acclaimed YouTube and Twitch channels, such as the accounts managed by Seth Abner
                                                                                           (known as Scump) and Damon Barlow (known as Karma).8 Both Abner and Barlow are profes-
                                                                                           sional players who stream their Call of Duty matches to millions of viewers worldwide. The choice
                                                                                           to engage with streaming material enabled me to access parts of the game that would have been
                                                                                           impossible to do by simply playing it myself. As I explain in more detail in the following sections of
                                                                                           this article, acquiring a nuclear weapon in Call of Duty is an exceptional accomplishment and, thus,
                                                                                           something that requires great skill and gaming abilities. While many non-professional players can
                                                                                           acquire nuclear weapons, engaging with the material streamed by Abner and Barlow ensures the
                                                                                           veracity and quality of data. It is important to note that my analysis focuses on what is represented
                                                                                           rather than players’ opinions on nuclear weapons. As such, I used streaming material to understand
                                                                                           how nuclear weapons are situated in the gameplay as well as the incentives and requirements for
                                                                                           acquiring and detonating the bomb.9 The analysis of campaign stories is conducted by using data
                                                                                           revealed by developers and information offered by specialist websites such as IGN walkthroughs
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           and data published on Call of Duty’s official blog.
                                                                                               To examine this data, I use a theoretical apparatus that builds upon feminist post-structuralist
                                                                                           theory, particularly the work of Laura Shepherd10 and Judith Butler.11 My theoretical apparatus
                                                                                           is centred on the assumption that discourse, broadly conceived, is productive of knowledge and,
                                                                                           therefore, constitutive of what we know about the world and its possible futures. I conduct decon-
                                                                                           structive discourse analysis to find the knowledge possibilities made intelligible upon representing
                                                                                           nuclear weapons as a win-condition, an exclusive item, and something one can play with. Through

                                                                                             7
                                                                                                Mike Hume, ‘The future of Call of Duty and Warzone’, The Washington Post, 8 June 2022, available at: {https://www.
                                                                                           washingtonpost.com/video-games/2022/06/08/call-duty-future-modern-warfare-2-warzone-2/}; Gene Park, ‘20 years in, Call
                                                                                           of Duty is a cultural and financial titan’, The Washington Post, 28 October 2023, available at: {https://www.washingtonpost.com/
                                                                                           entertainment/video-games/2023/10/28/call-of-duty-20-years/}.
                                                                                              8
                                                                                                Upon watching the videos, I compiled detailed notes about the requirements to acquire a weapon and the consequences
                                                                                           of detonating the nuclear weapon. I concluded that there were two central stories being told in Call of Duty games. One is
                                                                                           centred on reward, and the other on success. These will be further examined in the following sections.
                                                                                              9
                                                                                                This research uses publicly available material and follows the ethical guidelines by the Association of Internet Researchers
                                                                                           (available at: {https://aoir.org/ethics/}).
                                                                                              10
                                                                                                 Laura J. Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Security: Discourse as Practice (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2008); Laura J.
                                                                                           Shepherd, Narrating the Women, Peace and Security Agenda: Logics of Global Governance (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                                                                                           2021).
                                                                                              11
                                                                                                 Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (London: Routledge, 2006).
                                                                                                                                                                            Review of International Studies             689


                                                                                           the ‘excavation’ of discourse, I seek to uncover the logics creating stability and authority of a par-
                                                                                           ticular form of knowledge about nuclear weapons. I then theorise how these narratives have an
                                                                                           impact on what passes as normal in nuclear politics, inquiring into what the continuity of dominant
                                                                                           discourses makes possible politically.
                                                                                               Understanding how nuclear weapons are represented is integral to grasping and seizing pos-
                                                                                           sibilities for policy innovation and change. As a state-centric issue, nuclear weapons tend to be
                                                                                           examined as a problem that originates and terminates with the willingness of states to possess
                                                                                           and subsequently disarm. In other words, the IR literature examining the variants contributing
                                                                                           to the ongoing existence of nuclear weapons has primarily focused on how nuclear weapons
                                                                                           are ‘valued’ within state discursive acts.12 While this analysis is undoubtedly critical to under-
                                                                                           standing how the weapon ‘acquires’ its strategic and ideational value, more attention must be
                                                                                           given to other forms of cultural intelligibility in which the weapon is made imaginable. This
                                                                                           article advances an important contribution to nuclear weapons scholarship. It complements the
                                                                                           literature that calls for a more holistic approach to understanding the structures of power and
                                                                                           knowledge that make a nuclear world possible and places particular focus on the role of every-
                                                                                           day practice and discourse in sustaining the nuclear status quo.13 While popular culture alone
                                                                                           does not do the work of perpetuating the nuclear status quo, a holistic examination that includes
                                                                                           both state-centric and broader forms of cultural intelligibility is essential to make sense of the
                                                                                           nuclear issue while theorising the way forward. As such, this article seeks to draw attention to
                                                                                           the subtle processes of meaning production that construct and validate knowledge about nuclear
                                                                                           weapons.
                                                                                               Beyond the context of nuclear politics, this article can be helpful in providing a framework for
                                                                                           understanding structures of power and knowledge that make other pressing global issues possible.
                                                                                           Its engagement with video games as a cultural artefact opens the possibility for thinking about other
                                                                                           stories represented through this medium, particularly when it comes to new emerging technolo-
                                                                                           gies. Additionally, since many recreational video games are primarily played by young people14
                                                                                           – often with younger siblings nearby who pick up on the content – this article raises significant
                                                                                           questions about the kind of knowledge being passed on to the next generation, whom we hope will
                                                                                           make a positive impact on the world.
                                                                                               The article proceeds in three parts. First, I introduce the literature on popular culture and IR,
                                                                                           explaining how this literature will support the analysis of video games as sites of knowledge produc-
                                                                                           tion. Then, I develop the central argument examining how nuclear weapons are depicted in Call of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           Duty games. In this section, I examine two narratives, namely the nuclear reward and the nuclear


                                                                                             12
                                                                                                 Shampa Biswas, Nuclear Desire: Power and the Postcolonial Nuclear Order (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
                                                                                           2014); Carol Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’, Signs, 12:4 (1987), pp. 687–718; Kjølv Egeland,
                                                                                           ‘The ideology of nuclear order’, New Political Science, 43:2 (2021), pp. 208–30; Anne Harrington, ‘Nuclear weapons as the
                                                                                           currency of power’, The Nonproliferation Review, 16:3 (2009), pp. 325–45; Carolina Panico, ‘Making nuclear possession possible:
                                                                                           The NPT disarmament principle and the production of less violent and more responsible nuclear states’, Contemporary Security
                                                                                           Policy, 43:4 (2022), pp. 651–80; Nick Ritchie, ‘Valuing and devaluing nuclear weapons’, Contemporary Security Policy, 34:1
                                                                                           (2013), pp. 146–73; Scott D. Sagan, ‘Why do states build nuclear weapons? Three models in search of a bomb’, International
                                                                                           Security, 21:3 (1996), pp. 54–86.
                                                                                              13
                                                                                                 Laura Considine, ‘Narrative and nuclear weapons politics: The entelechial force of the nuclear origin myth’, International
                                                                                           Theory, 14:3 (2022), pp. 551–70; Laura Considine, ‘Rethinking the beginning of the “nuclear age” through telling feminist
                                                                                           nuclear stories’, Zeitschrift für Friedens- und Konfliktforschung, 12 (2022), pp. 185–193, available at: {https://doi.org/10.1007/
                                                                                           s42597-022-00082-8}; Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe, p. 74; Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear narratives in contemporary television’;
                                                                                           Rebecca H. Hogue and Anaïs Maurer, ‘Pacific women’s anti-nuclear poetry: Centring Indigenous knowledges’, International
                                                                                           Affairs, 98:4 (2022), pp. 1267–88; Benoît Pelopidas, ‘The birth of nuclear eternity’, in Sandra Kemp, and Jenny Andersson (eds),
                                                                                           Futures (Oxford University Press, 2021), pp. 484–500, available at: {https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198806820.013.28}.
                                                                                              14
                                                                                                 In a survey conducted by the University of Massachusetts Lowell and published by the Washington Post in 2018, almost
                                                                                           three-quarters of Americans ages 14–21 ‘either played or watched multiplayer online games or competitions’ in 2017; see Emily
                                                                                           Guskin, ‘Teenagers are fuelling a competitive gaming tidal wave’, The Washington Post, 9 March 2018, available at: {https://www.
                                                                                           washingtonpost.com/news/sports/wp/2018/03/09/teenagers-are-fueling-an-e-gaming-tidal-wave/}.
                                                                                           690        Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           success, and interrogate the play dimension of video games. The article concludes by advancing
                                                                                           suggestions for future research.


                                                                                           Popular culture and knowledge production
                                                                                           Popular culture is not simply telling us a story; the story it tells has profound constitutive effects
                                                                                           on the world. This is the central premise driving the analysis advanced in this article. To this end,
                                                                                           the works of Roland Bleiker,15 Laura Shepherd,16 and Jutta Weldes17 advance important theoreti-
                                                                                           cal tools to help us make sense of why popular culture matters and how it perpetuates particular
                                                                                           realities, truths, and possibilities. Central to my argument is the idea that discourse is a productive
                                                                                           apparatus that makes some realities intelligible while silencing others.18 Of course, films, media,
                                                                                           video games, and television are not the only artefacts propagating knowledge and, therefore, reit-
                                                                                           erating dominant forms of knowing the world. Nonetheless, these constitute forms of cultural
                                                                                           intelligibility that are informed by expectations of what is accepted as normal and logical while
                                                                                           also actively reproducing such realities. Following the post-structuralist concept of normalisation,
                                                                                           the continuity of discourse, and thus the repeated representation of certain knowledge, is central to
                                                                                           rendering what we know about the world pass as normal. As Butler explains in relation to gender
                                                                                           norms, ‘the norm only persists as a norm to the extent that it is acted out in social practice and
                                                                                           re-idealised and reinstituted in and through the daily social rituals’.19 Popular culture serves as a
                                                                                           vehicle for propagating and normalising knowledge through its representational and performative
                                                                                           qualities, which allow for the continuous repetition and reinforcement of discourse. Paying care-
                                                                                           ful attention to popular culture is essential to gain a more holistic understanding of the politics
                                                                                           of nuclear weapons, particularly the mechanisms beyond state elites’ discursive acts that render
                                                                                           nuclear weapons a persistent feature of global politics.
                                                                                               Through my interrogations of how nuclear weapons are depicted in video games, I seek to draw
                                                                                           attention to the importance of reflecting on, as Shepherd20 put it, ‘how the “conceptual apparatus”
                                                                                           regulating knowledge is produced and reproduced’. In doing so, I am able to see video games and
                                                                                           their features less as trivial, simply playful, or unreal and more as active apparatuses for knowl-
                                                                                           edge (re)production. Shepherd’s work reminds us that knowledge is always unstable, plural, and
                                                                                           multiple, and it is crucial to remain attentive to how and under what circumstances the dominant
                                                                                           categories informing what is expected, valid, and acceptable are reinforced.21 Like Shepherd, I see
                                                                                           our engagement with popular culture as ‘co-constitutive with the world and our place in it’, and so,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           it is essential to acknowledge that ‘no cultural artefact lends itself to a singular authoritative read-
                                                                                           ing’.22 As I work to understand games and what is represented in them, I also pay careful attention
                                                                                           to how dominant understandings of the masculine and the feminine are reiterated in such sto-
                                                                                           ries, which remains central to understanding the world and its possible futures. As such, I seek to
                                                                                           reaffirm the importance of a feminist curiosity as an analytical tool to identify and interrogate dom-
                                                                                           inant discursive practices, inquiring into the potentialities made intelligible by the repetition and
                                                                                           reiteration of gendered values and expectations.23 Moreover, I also remain attentive to the legacies

                                                                                             15
                                                                                                 Bleiker, ‘The aesthetic turn in international political theory’.
                                                                                             16
                                                                                                 Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Popular Culture.
                                                                                              17
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’.
                                                                                              18
                                                                                                 Butler, Gender Trouble; Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Security.
                                                                                              19
                                                                                                 Judith Butler, Undoing Gender (London: Routledge, 2004), p. 48.
                                                                                              20
                                                                                                 Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Popular Culture, p. 3.
                                                                                              21
                                                                                                 Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Popular Culture.
                                                                                              22
                                                                                                 Shepherd, Gender, Violence and Popular Culture, pp. 4–5.
                                                                                              23
                                                                                                 Cynthia Enloe, Bananas, Beaches and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of International Politics (Berkeley: University
                                                                                           of California Press, 2014); Kimberly Hutchings, ‘Feminist ethics and political violence’, International Politics, 44 (2007),
                                                                                           pp. 90–106; Laura Sjoberg and Caron E. Gentry, Mothers, Monsters, Whores: Women’s Violence in Global Politics (London:
                                                                                           Zed Books, 2007); Iris Marion Young, ‘The logic of masculinist protection: Reflections on the current security state’, Signs, 29:1
                                                                                           (2003), pp. 1–25.
                                                                                                                                                                          Review of International Studies             691


                                                                                           of colonialism and how such logics are implicated in legitimising nuclear possession and the power
                                                                                           relations sustaining the nuclear status quo.24
                                                                                               Jutta Weldes’s work titled ‘Going cultural: Star Trek, state action, and popular culture’ marks
                                                                                           an important methodological turn in the discipline of IR.25 Through an engaging analysis of the
                                                                                           discursive universe of Star Trek, Weldes directs the attention of IR scholars to the importance of
                                                                                           popular culture and its role in the production of ‘common sense’ about international politics. We
                                                                                           can think of culture as ‘the context within which people give meaning to their actions and experi-
                                                                                           ences and make sense of their lives’.26 Understood in this way, ‘culture encompasses the multiplicity
                                                                                           of discourses or “codes of intelligibility” through which meanings are constructed, and practices
                                                                                           are produced’.27 Rather than simply a product of the discursive practices of political elites, Weldes
                                                                                           argues, state policy has a ‘pervasive cultural basis’,28 and state action is naturalised through popu-
                                                                                           lar culture. For example, the analysis of the TV show Star Trek reveals how this cultural artefact
                                                                                           reproduces militarism while reiterating benevolent and liberal traits which form the basis of the
                                                                                           United States foreign policy. With this, Star Trek ‘parallels and reproduces elements of the common
                                                                                           sense of the United States foreign policy discourse’, and this further entrenches such expectations
                                                                                           in the social domain.29 Likewise, other works, such as Abigail E. Ruane and Patrick James’s analysis
                                                                                           of the Lord of the Rings novels30 and William Clapton and Laura Shepherd’s examination of Game
                                                                                           of Thrones,31 demonstrate how popular culture not only teaches us about the world and interna-
                                                                                           tional politics but also influences critical engagement with portrayed realities. As such, even though
                                                                                           Westeros, Middle-Earth, and Star Trek’s regions of space are ‘unreal’ worlds, they reproduce the
                                                                                           politics of the world informing their creation and imagination. My analysis in this article relies on
                                                                                           the theoretical foundations of this body of work. Revisiting the assumingly unreal scenarios of Call
                                                                                           of Duty, I identify and map gameplay narratives while theorising how dominant knowledge about
                                                                                           nuclear weapons, nuclear possessors, and the future is produced and validated.
                                                                                               In the context of nuclear politics, a burgeoning body of work continues to draw attention to the
                                                                                           importance of interrogating the ‘everydayness’ of nuclear weapons,32 with interventions emphasis-
                                                                                           ing how popular culture is informed by and reproduces the pervasive politics of nuclear weapons.
                                                                                           Originally published in 1985, The Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn
                                                                                           of the Atomic Age, written by Paul Boyer, offers an excellent analysis of the early atomic age, show-
                                                                                           ing how the nuclear weapon gained a prominent space in American popular culture soon after the
                                                                                           atomic explosions of 1945.33 Hollywood launched several productions based on nuclear related
                                                                                           themes, such as The Beginning or the End (1947), On the Beach (1959), and The Day After (1983).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           These early examples show how rather than a contemporary occurrence, nuclear weapons have a
                                                                                           long history of representation within popular culture. More recently, studies have interrogated rep-
                                                                                           resentations of nuclear related themes in TV shows, such as Manhattan34 and Vigil,35 and the films


                                                                                             24
                                                                                                 Biswas, Nuclear Desire; Ritu Mathur, ‘Sly civility and the paradox of equality/inequality in the nuclear order: A post–
                                                                                           colonial critique’, Critical Studies on Security, 4:1 (2016), pp. 57–72; Ritu Mathur, “‘The West and the Rest”: A civilizational
                                                                                           mantra in arms control and disarmament?’, Contemporary Security Policy, 35:3 (2014), pp. 332–55.
                                                                                              25
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’.
                                                                                              26
                                                                                                 John Tomlinson, Cultural Imperialism (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991), p. 7.
                                                                                              27
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’, p. 118.
                                                                                              28
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’, p. 118.
                                                                                              29
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’, p. 133.
                                                                                              30
                                                                                                 Ruane and James, ‘The International Relations of Middle-Earth’.
                                                                                              31
                                                                                                 Clapton and Shepherd, ‘Lessons from Westeros’.
                                                                                              32
                                                                                                 Considine, ‘Rethinking the beginning of the “nuclear age”’; Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe; Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear
                                                                                           narratives in contemporary television’; Taha, ‘Atomic aesthetics’.
                                                                                              33
                                                                                                 Paul Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age (Chapel Hill: University
                                                                                           of North Carolina Press, 2005).
                                                                                              34
                                                                                                 Considine, ‘Narrative and nuclear weapons politics’, p. 552.
                                                                                              35
                                                                                                 Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear narratives in contemporary television’.
                                                                                           692        Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           Oppenheimer and Barbie.36 Rhys Crilley offers a fascinating analysis of how popular culture shapes
                                                                                           the Third Nuclear Age, which includes a discussion of, for example, Sam Fender’s award-winning
                                                                                           record ‘Hypersonic Missiles’, which chronicles his felt insecurities regarding what is happening in
                                                                                           the world.37 As Christopher Nolan’s new film continues to receive numerous awards, including
                                                                                           seven Oscars, for its portrayal of Oppenheimer’s journey towards becoming the ‘destroyer of the
                                                                                           worlds’, it is important to pause to reflect on why some stories are (re)told and not others, and what
                                                                                           the (re)telling of these stories do politically.

                                                                                           Video games and the continuity of nuclear exceptionalism
                                                                                           Video games have been sidelined in IR debates, often treated as ‘unserious’, ‘apolitical’, and less
                                                                                           important than literature, film, or music when it comes to theorising global politics.38 Nonetheless,
                                                                                           a small but growing community of scholars continues to lead efforts to integrate video games into
                                                                                           conversations about international politics.39 What is unique about video games when compared
                                                                                           to other forms of popular culture representation is that actors engaging with it are ‘active partic-
                                                                                           ipants’ in the narrative rather than simply ‘passive receptors’.40 As Hayden explains, ‘videogames
                                                                                           incorporate the representative power of other cultural texts (e.g. film, television, literature) with
                                                                                           the engaging dimension of play, which carries its own particular persuasive capacity to convey,
                                                                                           normalise, and embed the value formations and tacit doxa of statecraft’.41 Through these unique
                                                                                           dynamics, IR scholars have drawn attention to games’ capacity to normalise violence and mil-
                                                                                           itary force, help interrogate and reflect upon the rules and incentives driving global political
                                                                                           relations, create emancipatory and contestatory possibilities, and provide military rehabilitation
                                                                                           and recruitment opportunities.42
                                                                                              Beyond IR, video games have been widely studied regarding their influence on individuals’ opin-
                                                                                           ions and behavioural choices, which includes conversations regarding games’ capacity to cause
                                                                                           and increase violence in the gamer.43 While this is certainly an important discussion, this article
                                                                                           does not engage with questions of subjectification (what games do to players).44 Rather, I focus my
                                                                                           interrogations on how video games offer opportunities for fixing and reiterating meanings, in line
                                                                                           with the theoretical framework presented above. Nonetheless, I would like to acknowledge that
                                                                                           ethnographic-based analyses could offer valuable research opportunities, including examining the
                                                                                           individuals playing and watching streamed material.45 My argument in this article is not that video
                                                                                           games influence individuals’ opinions about nuclear weapons, but rather that they create opportu-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           nities for the repetition and reinforcement of well-established knowledge about nuclear weapons.
                                                                                              36
                                                                                                 Emily Faux, ‘Deserted myths and nuclear realities: Revisiting the symbolism of nuclear weapons in contemporary pop-
                                                                                           ular culture through Oppenheimer’, Media, War & Conflict, 17:3 (2023), pp. 354–72; Emily Faux, ‘What Barbie can teach us
                                                                                           about nuclear weapons’, The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 3 August 2023, available at: {https://thebulletin.org/2023/08/what-
                                                                                           barbie-can-teach-us-about-nuclear-weapons/}.
                                                                                              37
                                                                                                 Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe, pp. 74–5.
                                                                                              38
                                                                                                 Hirst, ‘Wargames resurgent’, p. 2.
                                                                                              39
                                                                                                 Helen Berents and Brendan Keogh, ‘Dominant, damaged, disappeared: Imagining war through videogame bodies’,
                                                                                           Australian Journal of Political Science, 54:4 (2019), pp. 515–30; Ciută, ‘Call of Duty’; de Zamaróczy, ‘Are we what we play?’;
                                                                                           Hayden, ‘The procedural rhetorics of Mass Effect’; Robinson, ‘Videogames, persuasion and the War on Terror’; Aggie Hirst,
                                                                                           “‘Videogames saved my life”: Everyday resistance and ludic recovery among US military veterans’, International Political
                                                                                           Sociology, 15:4 (2021), pp. 482–503; Mark B. Salter, ‘The geographical imaginations of video games: Diplomacy, civilization,
                                                                                           America’s army and Grand Theft Auto IV’, Geopolitics, 16:2 (2011), pp. 359–88.
                                                                                              40
                                                                                                 de Zamaróczy, ‘Are we what we play?’, p. 168.
                                                                                              41
                                                                                                 Hayden, ‘The procedural rhetorics of Mass Effect’, p. 179.
                                                                                              42
                                                                                                 Berents and Keogh, ‘Dominant, damaged, disappeared’; Hayden, ‘The procedural rhetorics of Mass Effect’; Robinson,
                                                                                           ‘Videogames, persuasion and the War on Terror’; Hirst, ‘Videogames saved my life’.
                                                                                              43
                                                                                                 Craig A. Anderson, Douglas A. Gentile, and Katherine E. Buckley, Violent Video Game Effects on Children and Adolescents:
                                                                                           Theory, Research, and Public Policy (Oxford: Oxford Academic, 2007).
                                                                                              44
                                                                                                 Aggie Hirst, ‘Play in(g) international theory’, Review of International Studies, 45:5 (2019), pp. 891–914.
                                                                                              45
                                                                                                 Daniel Bos, ‘Answering the Call of Duty: Everyday encounters with the popular geopolitics of military-themed
                                                                                           videogames’, Political Geography, 63 (2018), pp. 54–64.
                                                                                                                                                                          Review of International Studies            693


                                                                                           With this, my concern about the little girl using the language of nuclearism in the game of tag is
                                                                                           that this knowledge, which originated from video games, is being performed in social practice.
                                                                                               Moreover, the fact that players actively engage in this cultural medium, including exchanges
                                                                                           inside and outside of the game platform, creates performative opportunities that are unique to this
                                                                                           type of cultural artefact. For example, in March 2024, Activision announced Season 3 of Warzone,46
                                                                                           which added additional maps and features to the current game. One of the new features was the
                                                                                           addition of special contracts, where players, after achieving certain requirements, could access an
                                                                                           exclusive part of the game and collect nuclear material, assemble the nuclear weapon, and det-
                                                                                           onate it. The announcement prompted players to share their expectations and enthusiasm about
                                                                                           nuclear weapons online,47 while several specialist websites reported on the announcement, with
                                                                                           some publishing walkthroughs on how to activate the special mission.48 It is important to note that
                                                                                           Warzone is a free-to-play game with a huge audience worldwide. As such, in addition to playing the
                                                                                           game, this kind of engagement generates representational opportunities where nuclear knowledge
                                                                                           is reproduced. The repeated reinforcement across various sites of knowledge production, including
                                                                                           video games, will have an impact on how people think about it. In other words, this is a two-step
                                                                                           process where video games generate knowledge reiteration opportunities, and the continuity of
                                                                                           discourse helps legitimise what is represented.
                                                                                               With this, further clarification is needed regarding who is responsible for reiterating such knowl-
                                                                                           edge, and what publics are influenced by such representations. While it is possible to study different
                                                                                           audiences, for example, state elites, ordinary people, and youth, among others, and investigate
                                                                                           how these people think about nuclear weapons, my approach is that doing so precludes impor-
                                                                                           tant aspects of a broader and more preliminary process of meaning production operating in the
                                                                                           social realm. This is not to say that the literature on public opinion about nuclear weapons is unim-
                                                                                           portant.49 It is to say that it is also crucial to pay careful attention to how knowledge is reiterated and
                                                                                           ‘performed’, and this complements public-opinion-centred interventions.50 The theoretical appa-
                                                                                           ratus introduced earlier, where repetition and reiteration are central to the continuity of dominant
                                                                                           forms of knowing the world, enables me to focus on how knowledge about nuclear weapons is
                                                                                           (re)constructed through performative and representational mechanisms that will then have an
                                                                                           impact on an individual’s perspectives and opinions.
                                                                                               Nuclear politics has a cultural basis, and video games are part of the knowledge-production
                                                                                           apparatus that assigns political value to the bomb. Disarmament, as Nick Ritchie importantly
                                                                                           argues, is contingent upon ‘peeling away the layers of value to the point where it becomes politically,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           strategically, and socially acceptable to permanently relinquish a nuclear capability’.51 As such, this
                                                                                           article makes an important contribution to the scholarship that seeks to understand ‘valuing’ mech-
                                                                                           anisms and invites reflection on the subtle discursive dynamics that continue to validate nuclear
                                                                                           weapons’ strategic capabilities and prioritise violent and exclusionary forms of understanding the
                                                                                           nuclear world. Nuclear disarmament depends on disrupting discourses that continue to reinforce
                                                                                           structures of power and knowledge that make a nuclear world possible. Focusing on the everyday
                                                                                             46
                                                                                                 David Hodgson, ‘Complete intel: Call of Duty: Modern Warfare III, Call of Duty: Warzone, and Call of Duty: Warzone:
                                                                                           Mobile Season 3: Everything you need to know’, Call of Duty blog, 27 March 2024, available at: {https://www.callofduty.com/
                                                                                           blog/2024/03/call-of-duty-modern-warfare-iii-warzone-wzm-season-3-maps-modes-zombies-announcement#Quest}.
                                                                                              47
                                                                                                 See, for example, this post from Dexerto, a video game and entertainment news website operated by Dexerto Limited, 3
                                                                                           April 2024, available at: {https://x.com/charlieINTEL/status/1775572855893148051}.
                                                                                              48
                                                                                                 S. E. Doster ‘CoD: Warzone – How to do Rebirth Island’s Champion’s Quest Nuke Challenge’, Gamespot, 28 March 2024,
                                                                                           available at: {https://www.gamespot.com/articles/cod-warzone-how-to-do-rebirth-islands-champions-quest-nuke-challenge/
                                                                                           1100-6522448/}.
                                                                                              49
                                                                                                 Some excellent works in this area include Joshua A. Schwartz, ‘When foreign countries push the button’, International
                                                                                           Security, 48:4 (2024), pp. 47–86; Lauren Sukin, ‘Credible nuclear security commitments can backfire: Explaining domestic sup-
                                                                                           port for nuclear weapons acquisition in South Korea’, Journal of Conflict Resolution, 64:6 (2020), pp. 1011–42. Michal Smetana,
                                                                                           Marek Vranka, and Ondrej    ̌ Rosendorf, ‘Public support for arms control in the Third Nuclear Age: Cross-national study in
                                                                                           NATO countries’, 10 July 2024, available at: {http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4881267}.
                                                                                              50
                                                                                                 For a database on people’s opinions on nuclear use, see {https://www.prcprague.cz/nuclear-taboo-database}.
                                                                                              51
                                                                                                 Ritchie, ‘Valuing and devaluing nuclear weapons’, p. 146.
                                                                                           694       Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           politics of nuclear weapons can help us uncover discursive practices that often remain invisible
                                                                                           beneath the well-established assumptions surrounding the state-centric nature of nuclear politics.

                                                                                           Call of Duty and its worst-kept secret
                                                                                           While the nuclear weapon in Call of Duty has been tweaked and revamped over the years, in the
                                                                                           multiplayer mode, it remains one of the most advantageous ways to gain match victories. Activision
                                                                                           likes to refer to nuclear weapons as a ‘worst-kept secret’, as there is certain exclusivity, secrecy, and
                                                                                           privilege surrounding the acquisition of these bombs. Ultimately, they are not primarily advertised
                                                                                           as part of the game experience. The nuclear weapon is ‘a hidden killstreak’; it becomes available only
                                                                                           when players achieve an extraordinary score or milestone in the game. In campaign stories, while
                                                                                           the dangerous nature of these weapons is depicted in some titles, representations also reinforce the
                                                                                           extraordinary power and exceptionalist dynamics seen in multiplayer games. Table 1 shows a list
                                                                                           of titles examined for this study and summarises key findings.
                                                                                              In the sections below, I focus on two specific game narratives: (i) the nuclear reward and (ii)
                                                                                           the nuclear success. Deconstructing each of these stories in relation to the rules, incentives, and
                                                                                           narratives shaping the gameplay experience, I show how Call of Duty reproduces well-established
                                                                                           understandings about nuclear weapons, their possessors, and the future. I begin with an analysis
                                                                                           of the requirements to acquire the weapon and then examine what happens when one is deto-
                                                                                           nated. Where nuclear weapons are depicted in single-player campaign modes, I examined how
                                                                                           representations reinforce and/or challenge multiplayer game dynamics.
                                                                                              The overarching argument I want to make is that, as a popular culture artefact, Call of Duty
                                                                                           contributes to constructing knowledge about nuclear weapons in subtle but significant ways to
                                                                                           very large audiences of people across the globe. Crucially, this work seeks to draw attention to the
                                                                                           importance of interrogating, as Weldes put it, ‘the everyday cultural conditions’ that make a nuclear
                                                                                           world possible.52 These stories, and all stories we engage, tell, write, and play matter as representa-
                                                                                           tions and ‘are never merely descriptive, but always normative and as such, exclusionary’.53 There is
                                                                                           something unique about video games that allows developers to insert certain conditionalities and
                                                                                           create storylines that seem unattainable. However, at the same time, such stories represent imagin-
                                                                                           able worlds. The ambivalence and somewhat-extraordinary experience provided by video games,
                                                                                           where one is granted permission to engage with the unthinkable and unspeakable, is in itself a story
                                                                                           of nuclear politics.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           The nuclear reward
                                                                                           In Call of Duty, to earn a nuclear weapon, players are required to achieve the highest scores or mile-
                                                                                           stones at standards that are incredibly difficult to maintain. As the developers of Warzone recently
                                                                                           revealed in an official blog post, ‘[the game] is hard, extremely intense, and the pacing is high’, and
                                                                                           ‘if you hesitate or make a mistake, you’ll probably fail’. Developers have designed game dynamics
                                                                                           ‘asking for perfection from players’.54 In this context, nuclear weapons are portrayed as exclusive
                                                                                           assets, secret weapons that only a select few can benefit from possessing. The rationale of all nuclear
                                                                                           rewards in Call of Duty, except for the Warzone nuclear contracts, is that players must eliminate
                                                                                           several enemies without dying. The number may vary depending on the game, but the logic remains
                                                                                           the same. For example, in Modern Warfare III, a player must achieve 30 consecutive kills, a score
                                                                                           that is statistically rare as it requires expertise, skill, and practice. In Warzone, developers intro-
                                                                                           duced nuclear weapons as a special mission, where players need to achieve an impressive score
                                                                                           before being granted access to this exclusive part of the game. The requirements are that players
                                                                                           should win 5 consecutive matches or 30 matches in total in a single season. The Champions Quest,
                                                                                             52
                                                                                                 Weldes, ‘Going cultural’, p. 133.
                                                                                             53
                                                                                                 Butler, Gender Trouble, p. 166.
                                                                                              54
                                                                                                 Valerie Lee, ‘Intel drop: Behind-the-Scenes with the Beenox Team’, Call of Duty official blog, 29 March 2024, available at:
                                                                                           {https://www.callofduty.com/blog/2024/03/call-of-duty-warzone-rebirth-island-return-beenox-interview#Resurgence}.
                                                                                                                                                                             Review of International Studies            695

                                                                                           Table 1. Call of duty games by year.
                                                                                             Title                         Year    Multiplayer depictions                       Campaign depictions
                                                                                             Call of Duty 4: Modern        2007    Not featured.                                A nuclear weapon is detonated and
                                                                                             Warfare                                                                            kills Sergeant Paul Jackson and
                                                                                                                                                                                several troops.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Modern          2009    25 kills to earn the nuke; detonat-          Previous detonation (CoD4) is
                                                                                             Warfare 2                             ing it ends the game and grants              briefly mentioned in the story;
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.                           another nuclear detonation destroys
                                                                                                                                                                                International Space Station.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Black Ops       2010    Not featured.                                Due to tensions between the US and
                                                                                                                                                                                USSR, the US plans a pre-emptive
                                                                                                                                                                                nuclear strike.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Modern          2011    25 kills to earn the M.O.A.B. (mother        A terrorist organisation seeks a code
                                                                                             Warfare 3                             of all bombs); detonating it does            to activate a nuclear device.
                                                                                                                                   not end the game but grants
                                                                                                                                   advantages.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Black Ops II    2012    Not featured.                                Not featured.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Ghosts          2013    25 kills to earn the K.E.M. (Kinetic         The game is set in a scenario that
                                                                                                                                   Energy Missile) Strike; detonating it        follows the nuclear destruction of
                                                                                                                                   does not end the game but grants             the Middle East.
                                                                                                                                   advantages.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Advanced        2014    30 kills to earn a DNA bomb; deto-           The story’s plot features a terror-
                                                                                             Warfare                               nating it does not end the game but          ist group launching simultaneous
                                                                                                                                   grants advantages.                           attacks against nuclear power plants
                                                                                                                                                                                worldwide, irradiating numerous
                                                                                                                                                                                cities, and killing 50,000 people.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Black Ops III   2015    Not featured.                                Not featured.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Infinite        2016    25 kills with specific weapons to            Not featured.
                                                                                             Warfare                               earn De-Atomizer Strike; detonat-
                                                                                                                                   ing it ends the game and grants
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: WWII            2017    Pre-requisites (earn prestige in every       Not featured.
                                                                                                                                   division at least one time), 25 kills
                                                                                                                                   to earn V2 Rocket; detonating it
                                                                                                                                   does not end the game but grants
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                                                                   advantages.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Black Ops 4     2018    Not featured.                                No single player campaign mode.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Modern          2019    30 kills to earn a tactical nuke; deto-      Not featured.
                                                                                             Warfare                               nating it ends the game and grants
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Black Ops       2020    30 kills to earn a nuke; detonat-            The campaign story revolves around
                                                                                             Cold War                              ing it ends the game and grants              preventing a nuclear conflict during
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.                           the Cold War.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Vanguard        2021    30 kills to earn V2 Rocket; detonat-         Not featured.
                                                                                                                                   ing it ends the game and grants
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Modern          2022    30 kills to earn a nuke; detonat-            In Mission 17 the player must stop a
                                                                                             Warfare II                            ing it ends the game and grants              missile headed to Washington, DC.
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Warzone         2020/   Win 5 consecutive matches or 30 in           No single-player campaign mode.
                                                                                                                           2022    total within a single season to access
                                                                                                                                   the nuke contract; detonating it ends
                                                                                                                                   the game and grants immediate
                                                                                                                                   victory and special rewards.
                                                                                             Call of Duty: Modern          2023    30 kills to earn a nuke; detonat-            Players must prevent the antagonist
                                                                                             Warfare III                           ing it ends the game and grants              from securing nuclear material left
                                                                                                                                   immediate victory.                           behind in an abandoned nuclear
                                                                                                                                                                                power plant.
                                                                                           696        Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           or nuke contract, as it is usually referred to, requires collecting nuclear materials, assembling a
                                                                                           nuclear bomb, and detonating it.55 To date, developers released several unique missions on differ-
                                                                                           ent scenarios, such as the iconic Al Mazrah, Urzikstan,56 and, more recently, Rebirth Island, where
                                                                                           players must complete tasks within a specific time to complete the mission.
                                                                                               The nuclear reward enables players to decide and control the match’s outcome, which is the
                                                                                           most privileged position in the game. Detonating the nuclear weapon will grant immediate victory
                                                                                           to the player and their team, as well as rewarding them with selected items. Interestingly, some
                                                                                           titles, like Modern Warfare 3 and Ghosts, feature other special weapons that are difficult to obtain
                                                                                           and yield extra points. However, using these weapons does not end the game. The representations
                                                                                           found in campaign stories are less explicit about the reward narrative and focus on the danger
                                                                                           of having these technologies in the hands of irresponsible actors, such as terrorist organisations.
                                                                                           To interrogate what is represented in the game and examine the realities informing depictions as
                                                                                           well as how representations reiterate and/or challenge knowledge about nuclear weapons, I now
                                                                                           turn my attention to critical nuclear weapons scholarship. This body of work explores how power
                                                                                           inequalities, gendered understandings, and colonial logics perpetuate the nuclear status quo as well
                                                                                           as how such inequalities are validated and sustained.
                                                                                               In Nuclear Desire: Power and the Postcolonial Nuclear Order, Shampa Biswas57 draws attention to
                                                                                           the exclusionary dynamics that sustain the nuclear status quo and how the often-acclaimed Non-
                                                                                           Proliferation Treaty (NPT) institutionalises the norms that make inequalities possible. Questioning
                                                                                           ‘Whose order?’, Biswas critiques the liberal ‘triumphalist narrative’ of the NPT and presents the
                                                                                           treaty as an instrument of hierarchy ordering and a way to freeze the nuclear status quo, where only
                                                                                           some states have access to what others are denied. The analysis captures the relations of power insti-
                                                                                           tuted by the rules of the NPT, where five states were acknowledged as nuclear-armed states while
                                                                                           others committed to exercising nuclear restraint.58 While the agreement rests upon the disarma-
                                                                                           ment condition, progress has been minimal, with some scholars suggesting that the disarmament
                                                                                           principle perpetuates possession rather than the elimination of nuclear weapons.59 With this, the
                                                                                           NPT is central to establishing and perpetuating inequalities in global politics and sets the standards
                                                                                           and norms that can be used to justify political choices, including ongoing possession and mod-
                                                                                           ernisation, in nuclear politics.60 As Biswas put it, non-nuclear states remain in the ‘waiting room
                                                                                           of history, never quite ready to handle the nuclear weapons that existing NWS [nuclear weapons
                                                                                           states] deem necessary for their own security yet unavailable to NNWS [non-nuclear weapons
                                                                                           states] regardless of their actual felt insecurities’.61
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                               Critical scholars have drawn attention to a myriad of discursive mechanisms rendering nuclear
                                                                                           possession acceptable.62 Feminist contributions show how culturally embedded gendered under-
                                                                                           standings pervade global politics/nuclear politics and help legitimise nuclear hierarchies and
                                                                                           possession.63 I have shown elsewhere that gendered understandings about war are reproduced
                                                                                           in nuclear discourse, and this helps nuclear possessors and their weapons to pass as normal.
                                                                                              55
                                                                                                  Doster, ‘CoD: Warzone’.
                                                                                              56
                                                                                                  Doster, ‘Call Of Duty: Warzone’.
                                                                                               57
                                                                                                  Biswas, Nuclear Desire.
                                                                                               58
                                                                                                  NPT, Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), UNODA, available at: {https://www.un.org/
                                                                                           disarmament/wmd/nuclear/npt/text/}.
                                                                                               59
                                                                                                  Egeland, ‘The ideology of nuclear order’; Panico, ‘Making nuclear possession possible’.
                                                                                               60
                                                                                                  Joelien Pretorius and Tom Sauer, ‘Is it time to ditch the NPT?’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 6 September 2019, available
                                                                                           at: {https://thebulletin.org/2019/09/is-it-time-to-ditch-the-npt/}.
                                                                                               61
                                                                                                  Biswas, Nuclear Desire, p. 97.
                                                                                               62
                                                                                                  See, for example, Laura Rose Brown and Laura Considine, ‘Examining “gender-sensitive” approaches to nuclear weapons
                                                                                           policy: A study of the Non-Proliferation Treaty’, International Affairs, 98:4 (2022), pp. 1249–66; Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the
                                                                                           rational world of defense intellectuals’, Claire Duncanson and Catherine Eschle, ‘Gender and the nuclear weapons state: A
                                                                                           feminist critique of the UK government’s white paper on Trident’, New Political Science, 30:4 (2008), pp. 545–63; Pelopidas,
                                                                                           ‘The birth of nuclear eternity’.
                                                                                               63
                                                                                                  Panico, ‘Challenging war traditions’; Duncanson and Eschle, ‘Gender and the nuclear weapons state’; Shine Choi and
                                                                                           Catherine Eschle, ‘Rethinking global nuclear politics, rethinking feminism’, International Affairs, 98:4 (2022), pp. 1129–47.
                                                                                                                                                                             Review of International Studies              697


                                                                                           The legitimacy and power of nuclear-armed states are contingent upon the intelligibility of non-
                                                                                           nuclear actors’ vulnerabilities and, thus, the very existence of such power relations.64 Along similar
                                                                                           lines, the concept of ‘nuclear orientalism’ advanced by Hugh Gusterson65 sheds light on how the
                                                                                           Western public discourse about nuclear weapons situates the bomb as a guarantor of security, a
                                                                                           good weapon. In contrast, the weapons of others are portrayed as dangerous and evil, which also
                                                                                           functions as a justificatory narrative. As a result, power inequalities as well as gendered and orien-
                                                                                           talist ideas shape the nuclear order and help constitute knowledge that upholds the legitimacy of
                                                                                           the nuclear status quo.66
                                                                                               Moreover, colonial logics sit at the heart of the global nuclear order.67 This is reflected not only
                                                                                           in the institutional arrangements created to supposedly regulate nuclear technology but also in
                                                                                           how these weapons are (or were) made, tested, and deployed. Arundhati Roy’s analysis of nuclear
                                                                                           weapons as ‘the ultimate coloniser’68 calls attention to how nuclear weapons are deeply entrenched,
                                                                                           sometimes quite subtly, in mechanisms that seek to prioritise the purported security of some over
                                                                                           the expense of the lives of others. To this end, the work of Teresia Teaiwa on how the bikini bathing
                                                                                           suit manifests ‘celebration and forgetting’ of the nuclear power that ‘strategically and materially
                                                                                           marginalises and erases the living history of Pacific Islanders’69 illustrates some of these violent
                                                                                           mechanisms. Racialised perspectives shaped decisions about nuclear testing programmes, where
                                                                                           colonial ideas depicted Indigenous peoples as expendable and their ‘distant lands’ as worthless.
                                                                                           Using similar analytical tools, Gabrielle Hecht shows how the West relies on African uranium
                                                                                           mining, drawing attention to the exploitation of the Global South to maintain the capabilities of
                                                                                           nuclear-armed states.70
                                                                                               What is crucial for the argument advanced in this section is that relations of power are not
                                                                                           merely exclusionary but also constitutive of the knowledge structures that make a nuclear world
                                                                                           possible. While Call of Duty represents a seemingly simple narrative that rests upon the idea of
                                                                                           rewarding deserving players, it reproduces, I argue, the exclusionary arrangements that sustain the
                                                                                           nuclear status quo where only a few ‘deserving’ states are allowed to possess nuclear weapons. It
                                                                                           celebrates the nuclear power that rewarded a few selected states with the capability to seemingly
                                                                                           secure and protect while effectively endangering and harming those deemed less civilised, respon-
                                                                                           sible, and skilled. Notably, the reward narrative – where players can decide the outcome of the
                                                                                           match in their favour – represents the privileged and powerful position of nuclear-armed states
                                                                                           in the global politics. In Modern Warfare II, for example, the image of the player pressing a but-
                                                                                           ton to deploy the bomb precisely reflects the perceived advantages and power of possessing nuclear
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           weapons (Figure 1). This image reproduces the idea that the future hinges on the nuclear possessor’s
                                                                                           judgement, command, and control.
                                                                                               Power relations are also replicated through the ‘Champions Quest’ language used to identify the
                                                                                           special nuclear contracts of Warzone. The words ‘Champions’ and ‘Quest’ reinforce the weapon’s
                                                                                           prestige and the exceptionalism that informs structures of knowledge legitimising its existence. It
                                                                                           is something that only the most formidable players, the champions, will be able to experience. In
                                                                                           video games, quests are generally associated with understandings of pleasure, great value, or signif-
                                                                                           icance which will lead to rewards and story progression. These meanings contribute to validating
                                                                                           the exceptional value of nuclear weapons and situate the bomb as beneficial, helpful, and worth
                                                                                           pursuing.
                                                                                             64
                                                                                                 Panico, ‘Challenging war traditions’.
                                                                                             65
                                                                                                 Hugh Gusterson, Nuclear Rites: A Weapons Laboratory at the End of the Cold War (Berkeley: University of California Press,
                                                                                           1996).
                                                                                              66
                                                                                                 Crilley, Unparalleled Catastrophe; Pelopidas, ‘The birth of nuclear eternity’; Teresia K. Teaiwa, ‘bikinis and other s/pacific
                                                                                           n/oceans’, The Contemporary Pacific, 6:1 (1994), pp. 87–109.
                                                                                              67
                                                                                                 Karly D. Burch, ‘The consequences of nuclear imperialism and colonialism’, Newsroom, 23 November 2022, available at:
                                                                                           {http://newsroom.co.nz/2022/11/23/the-consequences-of-nuclear-imperialism-and-colonialism/}.
                                                                                              68
                                                                                                 Arundhati Roy, The End of Imagination (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2016), p. 59.
                                                                                              69
                                                                                                 Teaiwa, ‘bikinis and other s/pacific n/oceans’, p. 87.
                                                                                              70
                                                                                                 Gabrielle Hecht, ‘Nuclear ontologies’, Constellations, 13:3 (2006), pp. 320–31.
                                                                                           698       Carolina Pantoliano




                                                                                           Figure 1. Deploying a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023 Activision Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use.


                                                                                               Campaign depictions of US-based protagonists fighting against irresponsible actors reinforce
                                                                                           the logic of protection identified by feminist scholars. The game portrays characters racing against
                                                                                           time to stop ballistic missile launches71 and prevent attacks on nuclear power plants.72 Many
                                                                                           nuclear-armed states proudly present themselves as responsible stewards and protectors of world
                                                                                           order,73 which remains central, feminist scholars argue, to the legitimacy of configurations of power
                                                                                           and the ongoing possession and modernisation of nuclear weapons. Thus, Call of Duty provides
                                                                                           an opportunity to reinforce the knowledge structures, grounded in power relations, that make
                                                                                           nuclear weapons a persistent feature of global politics. The narratives about nuclear weapons serve
                                                                                           as important sites of knowledge production, making power hierarchies understandable while sus-
                                                                                           taining a discourse of responsibility that favours nuclear possession and perpetuates a violent status
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           quo.74

                                                                                           Nuclear success
                                                                                           Detonating the bomb in Call of Duty triggers a countdown, followed by a screen displaying the
                                                                                           words ‘nuke’ and ‘victory’ against the backdrop of a massive explosion (Figures 2, 3, and 4). Once it
                                                                                           explodes and all players are, as many specialised websites describe, obliterated, victory is awarded
                                                                                           to the player who deployed the weapon and their team, regardless of the match’s score. Nuclear
                                                                                           weapons are thus programmed as a win-condition, rewarding players for their skill and excellent
                                                                                           performance. Nuclear detonations are less prominent in campaign stories, with only a few games
                                                                                           incorporating nuclear explosions and ballistic missile launches in their storylines. Nonetheless,
                                                                                           it is important to note that, differently from multiplayer games, campaign stories have not always
                                                                                           portrayed nuclear weapons as beneficial and advantageous. In the famous ‘Shock and Awe’ mission
                                                                                           in Call of Duty 4, a nuclear detonation in the Middle East kills a large number of troops, including
                                                                                             71
                                                                                                Modern Warfare 2, Modern Warfare II, and Modern Warfare III.
                                                                                             72
                                                                                                Modern Warfare III.
                                                                                             73
                                                                                                See Panico, ‘Challenging war traditions’; Duncanson and Eschle, ‘Gender and the nuclear weapons state’.
                                                                                             74
                                                                                                Laura Considine and James Souter, ‘State responsibilities and international nuclear politics’, in Hannes Hansen-
                                                                                           Magnusson and Antje Vetterlein (eds), The Routledge Handbook on Responsibility in International Relations (London:
                                                                                           Routledge, 2021), pp. 164–176.
                                                                                                                                                                        Review of International Studies          699




                                                                                           Figure 2. Call of Duty: Modern Warfare III (2023). Follow-up screen after using a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023
                                                                                           Activision Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use.




                                                                                           Figure 3. Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 (2009). Follow-up screen after using a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023 Activision
                                                                                           Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use .
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           Figure 4. Call of Duty: Modern Warfare (2019). Follow-up screen after using a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023 Activision
                                                                                           Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use.


                                                                                           the player’s character, Sergeant Paul Jackson. Conversely, in Modern Warfare 2, a nuclear explo-
                                                                                           sion creates an Electro Magnetic Pulse that disables electronic devices across the eastern United
                                                                                           States and helps reduce some of the intense fighting around Washington, DC. Here, while the game
                                                                                           shows images of a burning city and situates the nuclear weapon as responsible for destroying the
                                                                                           International Space Station (ISS), the bomb is still featured in terms of its beneficial outcomes.
                                                                                              As I develop my analysis, I consider the win-condition in terms of achieving successful out-
                                                                                           comes such as power, security, and stability. While nuclear weapons are detonated in the game,
                                                                                           700       Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           these weapons are depicted as a valuable asset that grants a path to a favourable outcome, which
                                                                                           is a prominent logic informing deterrence-oriented thinking about nuclear weapons.75 In these
                                                                                           terms, nuclear weapons are widely regarded as a security feature that can help maintain peace and
                                                                                           stability (successful outcomes). In any case, portraying nuclear weapons as symbols of success is
                                                                                           problematic; it still reinforces the strategic logic and perceived military value of these weapons.
                                                                                               The utility of nuclear weapons remains contested in the discipline of IR and in policymaking
                                                                                           spaces, with many scholars and practitioners challenging its purported benefits.76 Nonetheless,
                                                                                           scholars have theorised how nuclear weapons may serve to balance power, deter aggression, and
                                                                                           guarantee security.77 As Hugh Gusterson shows in his anthropological study of nuclear weapons
                                                                                           laboratories, the driving principle in these spaces was that ‘nuclear weapons exist to save lives and
                                                                                           prevent war’.78 Beyond material capabilities, nuclear weapons have been socially constructed as
                                                                                           ‘the currency of power’,79 valued as ‘a symbol of modernity’,80 and may also be associated with
                                                                                           ‘great power responsibility’.81 Jacques E. C. Hymans’s analysis of nuclear weapons utilising the
                                                                                           ‘bomb as God’ metaphor captures how nuclear weapons are perceived as sublime, mysterious,
                                                                                           and yet exceptionally powerful, and this shapes the political choices around non-proliferation
                                                                                           and disarmament.82 For instance, Robert Jay Lifton and Greg Mitchell argued in the 1990s that
                                                                                           ‘Oppenheimer was actually ambivalent toward the hydrogen bomb, but what he subverted in such a
                                                                                           statement was precisely what nuclearism, from Truman onward, sought always to conceal: that they
                                                                                           had surrendered to and at the same time identified with the weapon’s promise of godlike power’.83
                                                                                           Ultimately, for many states, particularly those that possess nuclear weapons, the bomb, like the
                                                                                           representations in Call of Duty, is a life-changing tool to reverse the course of events regardless of
                                                                                           the situation.
                                                                                               The exceptional nature of nuclear weapons and their capability to bring incontestable success is
                                                                                           often invoked in state discourse. Nuclear-armed states speak of their nuclear arsenals as an asset
                                                                                           to deter aggression and protect partners and allies while preserving global peace and stability. For
                                                                                           example, in its Integrated Review of 2021, the United Kingdom refers to nuclear weapons as crucial
                                                                                           ‘to deter the most extreme threats to national security and way of life, helping guarantee security
                                                                                           and that of allies’.84 Similar ideas are laid out in the Integrated Review Refresh of 2023.85 Likewise,
                                                                                           NATO claims that ‘it [the nuclear weapon] has the capabilities and the resolve to impose costs on
                                                                                           the adversary that would be unacceptable and far outweigh the benefits that any adversary could
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                              75
                                                                                                 Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2020); Kenneth N. Waltz, ‘The spread
                                                                                           of nuclear weapons: More may be better. Introduction’, The Adelphi Papers, 21:171 (1981), p. 1.
                                                                                              76
                                                                                                 Ray Acheson, Banning the Bomb, Smashing the Patriarchy (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2021); Marianne Hanson,
                                                                                           Challenging Nuclearism: A Humanitarian Approach to Reshape the Global Nuclear Order (Manchester: Manchester University
                                                                                           Press, 2022); Alexander Kmentt, The Treaty Prohibiting Nuclear Weapons: How It Was Achieved and Why It Matters (London:
                                                                                           Routledge, 2021).
                                                                                              77
                                                                                                 Waltz, ‘The spread of nuclear weapons’, p. 1; Bernard Brodie, ‘The anatomy of deterrence’, World Politics, 11:2 (1959), pp.
                                                                                           173–91; Schelling, Arms and Influence.
                                                                                              78
                                                                                                 Gusterson, Nuclear Rites, p. 57.
                                                                                              79
                                                                                                 Harrington, ‘Nuclear weapons as the currency of power’.
                                                                                              80
                                                                                                 Sagan, ‘Why do states build nuclear weapons?’.
                                                                                              81
                                                                                                 Michael Quinlan, Thinking about Nuclear Weapons: Principles, Problems, Prospects (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
                                                                                           2009).
                                                                                              82
                                                                                                 Jacques E. C. Hymans, ‘The Bomb as God: A metaphor that impedes nuclear disarmament’, Security Studies, 33:1 (2023),
                                                                                           pp. 1–29, available at: {https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2023.2256655}.
                                                                                              83
                                                                                                 Robert J. Lifton and Greg Mitchell, Hiroshima in America: A Half Century of Denial (New York: Harper Perennial, 1996),
                                                                                           p. 334.
                                                                                              84
                                                                                                 United Kingdom, ‘Global Britain in a Competitive Age: The Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development and
                                                                                           Foreign Policy’, March 2021, available at: {https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
                                                                                           attachment_data/file/975077/Global_Britain_in_a_Competitive_Age-_the_Integrated_Review_of_Security__Defence__
                                                                                           Development_and_Foreign_Policy.pdf}.
                                                                                              85
                                                                                                 United Kingdom, ‘Integrated Review Refresh 2023’, 1 March 2023, available at: {https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
                                                                                           media/641d72f45155a2000c6ad5d5/11857435_NS_IR_Refresh_2023_Supply_AllPages_Revision_7_WEB_PDF.pdf}.
                                                                                                                                                                          Review of International Studies             701


                                                                                           hope to achieve’.86 What is noteworthy in these examples when compared to what is being repre-
                                                                                           sented in Call of Duty is that nuclear weapons are portrayed as decisive and precise responses that
                                                                                           will generate the expected and favourable outcome no matter the obstacle. As the United Kingdom
                                                                                           puts it, nuclear weapons ensure that other states ‘can never use their nuclear weapons to threaten
                                                                                           and constrain [their] decision making’.87 In Call of Duty, nuclear capabilities are portrayed as a path
                                                                                           to successful results, where players can control and secure the match, concepts linked to claims
                                                                                           of strategic stability in global politics. Crucially, the overarching narrative in Call of Duty is that
                                                                                           nuclear weapons are a guarantor of success, which replicates well-established ideas around these
                                                                                           weapons’ capability to guarantee security.
                                                                                              This perceived success in protecting, securing, and deterring has been addressed in several stud-
                                                                                           ies as knowledge that reiterates dominant understandings that make a nuclear world possible.88
                                                                                           For example, Carol Cohn critiques the sense of control afforded by mastering the technostrate-
                                                                                           gic language, including ideas about deterrence, and draws attention to how it is carefully crafted
                                                                                           to produce a sense of calculated, successful, and rational choices.89 However, this language, Cohn
                                                                                           argues, ‘does not allow certain questions to be asked or certain values to be expressed’.90 This is
                                                                                           important because, as in Call of Duty, the strategic discourse forecloses important ideas around
                                                                                           the inhumanity of nuclear weapons. Likewise, Benoît Pelopidas critiques the overconfidence in the
                                                                                           controllability of nuclear technology and draws attention to how states like France ‘stand out for
                                                                                           their public display of confidence in the perfect safety record of their nuclear arsenal’.91 These ideas
                                                                                           promote a view of nuclear weapons that overlooks alternatives to nuclear deterrence, such as the
                                                                                           role of luck in preventing nuclear catastrophe, and downplays the urgent need to pursue nuclear
                                                                                           disarmament. As such, the nuclear success narrative represented in Call of Duty is part of a cultural
                                                                                           apparatus that continues to glorify nuclear weapons while silencing other mechanisms through
                                                                                           which the weapon impacts the world, including neglecting the colonial, racialised, and gendered
                                                                                           logics underpinning nuclear weapons’ existence. As Cohn concludes, ‘the dominant voice of mili-
                                                                                           tarised masculinity and decontextualized rationality speaks so loudly in our culture, it will remain
                                                                                           difficult for any other voices to be heard until that voice loses some of its power’.92
                                                                                              What is crucial for the argument is that even though nuclear weapons have not been used since
                                                                                           1945 and have not been widely tested since the end of the Cold War, the understandings that
                                                                                           informed these decisions and legitimised such actions still pervade the global nuclear order.93 The
                                                                                           success of nuclear-armed states in accumulating power and securing strategic advantages rests on
                                                                                           supressing the humanitarian and environmental impacts of nuclear weapons. After the destruc-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           tion of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which by the end of 1945 had killed an estimated 214,000 people,
                                                                                           nuclear-armed states conducted more than 2,000 nuclear detonations. These so-called tests not
                                                                                           only displaced and harmed thousands of people but also still cause severe health problems in
                                                                                           affected communities. The environment at testing sites has been dramatically affected, with many
                                                                                           arguing that the worst is yet to come, as climate change will accelerate the degradation of structures

                                                                                              86
                                                                                                 NATO, ‘NATO’s nuclear deterrence policy and forces’, 30 November 2023, available at: {https://www.nato.int/cps/en/
                                                                                           natohq/topics_50068.htm}, accessed 28 March 2024.
                                                                                              87
                                                                                                 United Kingdom ‘The UK’s nuclear deterrent: What you need to know’, 28 March 2024, available at: {https://www.
                                                                                           gov.uk/government/publications/uk-nuclear-deterrence-factsheet/uk-nuclear-deterrence-what-you-need-to-know}, acessed
                                                                                           30 March 2024.
                                                                                              88
                                                                                                 Biswas, Nuclear Desire; Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’; Crilley, Unparalleled
                                                                                           Catastrophe; Panico, ‘Challenging war traditions’; Benoît Pelopidas, ‘The unbearable lightness of luck: Three sources of
                                                                                           overconfidence in the manageability of nuclear crises’, European Journal of International Security, 2:2 (2017), pp. 240–62.
                                                                                              89
                                                                                                 Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’.
                                                                                              90
                                                                                                 Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’, p. 708.
                                                                                              91
                                                                                                 Pelopidas, ‘The unbearable lightness of luck’, p. 242.
                                                                                              92
                                                                                                 Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’, p. 717.
                                                                                              93
                                                                                                 It is crucial to remain attentive to how the language of ‘testing’ can obscure the real impacts of what in reality was the
                                                                                           actual use of nuclear weapons. See Ruoyu Li, ‘Testing as the blindspot of nuclear nonuse’, Security Studies, 33:3 (2024), pp.
                                                                                           348–71.
                                                                                           702       Carolina Pantoliano




                                                                                           Figure 5. Call of Duty: Warzone (2022). Follow-up screen after using a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023 Activision
                                                                                           Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use.




                                                                                           Figure 6. Call of Duty: Warzone (2022). Follow-up screen after using a nuclear weapon. Copyright © 2023 Activision
                                                                                           Publishing, Inc., reproduced in accordance with fair use.


                                                                                           built to supposedly ‘control’ the spread of radioactive material.94 Like the stories supressed to sup-
                                                                                           port the ongoing possession and modernisation of nuclear weapons, Call of Duty’s nuclear success
                                                                                           narrative subdues the humanitarian and environmental impacts of nuclear weapons detonations.
                                                                                               Gameplay visuals are primarily focused on glorifying the magnificent mushroom cloud and
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           its acclaimed features, e.g. bright red colours and mushroom-shaped cloud, which rapidly leads
                                                                                           to an ending scene displaying the scores and granting victory to the nuclear possessor and their
                                                                                           team (Figures 5 and 6). As a result, the use of nuclear weapons rewards those who possess them,
                                                                                           just as nuclear use and testing have supposedly done, while simultaneously obscuring the ongoing
                                                                                           devastation caused by nuclear detonations. The legitimacy of nuclear weapons is upheld not only by
                                                                                           discourses celebrating their success but also by the silenced stories of nuclear harm and injustice. To
                                                                                           this end, it is imperative to theorise the complex cultural mechanisms (re-)entrenching possibilities
                                                                                           in which the weapon is a path to fortune rather than a catastrophe in global politics. Identifying
                                                                                           and understanding these mechanisms is of utter importance for realising a world free of nuclear
                                                                                           weapons.

                                                                                           The nuke pleasure and the politics of play
                                                                                           So far, I have examined the narratives represented in Call of Duty and focused on how these stories
                                                                                           reinforce dominant knowledge about nuclear weapons and the nuclear status quo. As I have shown,
                                                                                             94
                                                                                                Patricia A. O’Brien, ‘75 years after nuclear testing in the Pacific began, the fallout continues to wreak havoc’, The
                                                                                           Conversation, 5 April 2021, available at: {http://theconversation.com/75-years-after-nuclear-testing-in-the-pacific-began-the-
                                                                                           fallout-continues-to-wreak-havoc-158208}; Lucy Sherriff, ‘Endless fallout: The Pacific idyll still facing nuclear blight 77 years
                                                                                           on’, The Guardian, 25 April 2023, available at: {https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/aug/25/endless-fallout-
                                                                                           marshall-islands-pacific-idyll-still-facing-nuclear-blight-77-years-on}.
                                                                                                                                                                           Review of International Studies             703


                                                                                           while video games, as cultural texts, offer numerous possibilities for analysis, in this article, I have
                                                                                           followed Ian Bogost’s call to focus on what games do.95 More specifically, rather than focusing
                                                                                           on how games work, what social interactions they promote, or their psychological and cognitive
                                                                                           implications, I am concerned about what video games make possible politically. To this end, in this
                                                                                           section, I turn my attention to the ‘playing’ dimension of video games and what the representation
                                                                                           of play, as discourse, enables and constrains.
                                                                                               Like many social sciences and humanities concepts, play has no set definition. Nonetheless,
                                                                                           theorists tend to emphasise play’s pleasurable and symbolic characteristics. While some forms of
                                                                                           play might involve tension and unpleasant experiences, scholars have shown how people engage
                                                                                           in play because of the joy it affords. In other words, play is often associated with positive feelings,
                                                                                           happiness, excitement, and out-of-the-ordinary experiences in society and culture. Johan Huizinga
                                                                                           defines play as ‘a free activity standing quite consciously outside “ordinary” life as being “not seri-
                                                                                           ous”, but at the same time absorbing the player intensely and utterly. It is an activity connected with
                                                                                           no material interest, and no profit can be gained. It proceeds within its own proper boundaries of
                                                                                           time and space according to fixed rules and in an orderly manner’.96 Jean Piaget refers to play as a
                                                                                           ‘happy display of known actions’,97 while Brian Sutton Smith argues that play ‘is a pleasure for its
                                                                                           own sake, but its genetic gift is perhaps the sense that life, temporarily at least, is worth living’.98 Lev
                                                                                           Vygotsky importantly adds an empowering layer to play. His theory suggests that ‘a child always
                                                                                           behaves beyond his average age, above his daily behaviour; in play it is as though he were a head
                                                                                           taller than himself ’.99 While providing different visions of play, these definitions can help us see
                                                                                           important normative expectations revolving around play as a social phenomenon. Crucially, play
                                                                                           is expected to be fun, joyful, happy, empowering, and extraordinary, and this, I argue, is constitutive
                                                                                           of the contexts in which play is enacted.
                                                                                               While a small but growing number of IR scholars have been studying and engaging with the
                                                                                           phenomenon of play and its politics, play is still very much neglected in the discipline.100 Like
                                                                                           these scholars, I aim to draw attention to the importance of taking play seriously, and I hope my
                                                                                           analysis here can open possibilities for further engagement with the dimension of play and its
                                                                                           productive aspects. Play, I argue, works as a system of knowledge production, thus subtly adding
                                                                                           a layer of meaning to what is being represented in the gameplay. It works as a discursive layer
                                                                                           that is constitutive of a particular reality that, like the narratives I have shown earlier, reiterates
                                                                                           dominant forms of knowing the nuclear world. While the game represents undefeatable, power-
                                                                                           ful, and exceptional weapons, it downplays the seriousness of these features, and in turn, of nuclear
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           weapons themselves, through ‘playing’ them. This is not to say that the representation of play inval-
                                                                                           idates the productive nature of video games as a cultural medium. Rather, I situate this ludic aspect
                                                                                           of video games as a meaning-making system, working synergically with gameplay stories to rein-
                                                                                           force knowledge about nuclear weapons. The rationale behind this is that the representation of
                                                                                           play, as a social practice that is often associated with pleasure, joy, symbolism, and extraordinar-
                                                                                           iness, obscures the gravity of nuclear weapons as a global challenge. It enables the production of
                                                                                           less dangerous and less violent bombs, something with which one can actually play and ultimately
                                                                                           experience joy while bombing others.
                                                                                               The characteristics of nuclear weapons make it impossible to visualise or engage with the sub-
                                                                                           ject matter without using metaphors and abstractions. The very existence of nuclear weapons is


                                                                                             95
                                                                                                 Bogost, ‘Comparative video game criticism’.
                                                                                             96
                                                                                                 Johan Huizinga, Homo Ludens (London: Taylor & Francis, 1998), p. 13.
                                                                                              97
                                                                                                 Jean Piaget, Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood (London: Psychology Press, 1999), p. 93.
                                                                                              98
                                                                                                 Brian Sutton-Smith, ‘Play theory: A personal journey and new thoughts’, American Journal of Play, 1:1 (2008), pp. 80–123
                                                                                           (p. 122).
                                                                                              99
                                                                                                 Lev S. Vygotsky, ‘Play and its role in the mental development of the child’, Soviet Psychology, 5:3 (1967), pp. 6–18.
                                                                                              100
                                                                                                  Hirst, ‘Play in(g) international theory’; Maria Mälksoo, ‘The challenge of liminality for International Relations theory’,
                                                                                           Review of International Studies, 38:2 (2012), pp. 481–94.
                                                                                           704       Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           marked by the ‘out of the ordinary’ discourse, metaphors, and abstract symbols.101 As Emily Faux
                                                                                           explains, many features such as radioactivity and subatomic processes are portrayed as ‘beyond
                                                                                           human senses’, and thus ‘we can speak of them, and think of them only through metaphor’.102
                                                                                           Considering this, I argue that the dimension of play in video games helps reproduce this sense of
                                                                                           abstraction that sustains the intelligibility of nuclear weapons. As Huizinga put it, ‘play is superflu-
                                                                                           ous … play can be deferred or suspended at any time … play is not ordinary or real life. It is instead
                                                                                           a stepping out of real life into a temporary sphere of activity with a disposition all of its own. Every
                                                                                           child knows that he is “only pretending” or that it “was only for fun”.103 The nuclear sublime,104
                                                                                           for example, which is often represented in images of nuclear explosions, nurtures understandings
                                                                                           about the extraordinary and exceptional nature of the bomb, something that is ‘fundamentally dif-
                                                                                           ferent from any other human creation’.105 Notably, not only do video games provide a space for
                                                                                           representing nuclear knowledge, but the very nature of this cultural artefact, as playful, reiterates
                                                                                           modes of abstraction that perpetuate dominant understandings about the nuclear world.
                                                                                               It is important to note that my analysis here, as I explained earlier, focuses on what is under-
                                                                                           stood as playing practice and how these understandings impact on what is represented in Call of
                                                                                           Duty. However, I would like to acknowledge that an analysis of players’ reactions, emotions, and
                                                                                           opinions, in the context of play, as well as a detailed analysis of the reactions of those watching
                                                                                           matches online, would constitute an important contribution. As I conducted my data collection,
                                                                                           I noticed that players commemorate acquiring the nuclear weapon on various occasions, appear-
                                                                                           ing pleasantly content with their achievements,106 while millions of followers praise the ‘glorious’
                                                                                           undertaking. As Daniel Bos shows, studying the geopolitics of virtual war and examining players’
                                                                                           imaginaries and fantasies concerning the ways in which war and militaries operate offer important
                                                                                           insights into how individuals make sense of the world.107 Bos calls attention to how, for example,
                                                                                           play spaces, that is, online communities, are often ‘gendered, heteronormative, and promote and
                                                                                           reinforce national identities’.108 Moreover, Bos’s work invites more engagement with audiences and
                                                                                           explains how studying interactions in these play spaces can reveal important dynamics through
                                                                                           which geopolitical meaning is produced and validated. These encounters, Bos argues, form a com-
                                                                                           plex web of representational practices, which, like Butler’s normalisation mechanism, contribute
                                                                                           to the (dis)continuity of what passes as true, valid, and normal in the social domain. While my
                                                                                           approach in this article focused on representation and deconstruction, rather than ethnography, I
                                                                                           do share Bos’s concerns regarding practice and the ‘performative’ nature of play. What is certainly
                                                                                           intriguing about the complexity of play is that nuclear weapons are being referenced or symbolised
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           outside of video game settings, such as in games of tag.
                                                                                               To conclude, as a ludic setting, playing video games allows the dominant discourse about
                                                                                           nuclear weapons to operate behind the veil of joyful and extraordinary moments. Huizinga explains
                                                                                           that ‘play may rise to heights of beauty and sublimity that leave seriousness far beneath’.109 With
                                                                                           this, the dimension of play, I argue, has profound constitutive effects on the realities represented,

                                                                                              101
                                                                                                  Cohn, ‘Sex and death in the rational world of defense intellectuals’; Laura Considine, ‘The standardization of catastro-
                                                                                           phe: Nuclear disarmament, the Humanitarian Initiative and the politics of the unthinkable’, European Journal of International
                                                                                           Relations, 23:3 (2017), pp. 681–702.
                                                                                              102
                                                                                                  Faux, ‘Navigating nuclear narratives in contemporary television’, p. 5.
                                                                                              103
                                                                                                  Huizinga, Homo Ludens, p. 8.
                                                                                              104
                                                                                                  The nuclear sublime is a reference to nuclear detonations and how they are perceived as extraordinary, and ‘out of this
                                                                                           world’ experiences.
                                                                                              105
                                                                                                  Hecht, ‘Nuclear ontologies’, p. 321.
                                                                                              106
                                                                                                  See for example Karma, ‘MY BEST TWITCH CLIPS | OPTIC KARMA’, 3 July 2021, available at {https://www.youtube.
                                                                                           com/watch?v=DCsneQmUpWw}; Karma, ‘WORLDS FIRST MODERN WARFARE NUCLEAR!! MY FIRST GAME ON THE
                                                                                           BETA! (COD: MW)’, 12 September 2019, available at: {https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3Iqyf9omXA}; Scump, ‘Scump
                                                                                           drops the fastest nuke on Vanguard’, 20 November 2021, available at: {https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AzhXEhhHr-8}.
                                                                                              107
                                                                                                  Bos, ‘Answering Call of Duty’, p. 55.
                                                                                              108
                                                                                                  Bos, ‘Answering Call of Duty’, p. 62.
                                                                                              109
                                                                                                  Huizinga, Homo Ludens, p. 8.
                                                                                                                                                                            Review of International Studies              705


                                                                                           reducing the seriousness of nuclear weapons as a global challenge and reinforcing their perceived
                                                                                           extraordinary traits, all within the context of nuclear pleasure.

                                                                                           Conclusion
                                                                                           Video games are an important popular culture artefact that is constitutive of the nuclear weapons
                                                                                           world and its possible futures. Using a feminist post-structuralist methodology, I interrogated how
                                                                                           nuclear weapons are depicted in Call of Duty games. I identified two important narratives that
                                                                                           reiterate structures of power and knowledge that legitimise nuclear weapons. The nuclear reward
                                                                                           narrative reproduces exclusionary relations of power that sustain the dominant status quo, includ-
                                                                                           ing colonial and gendered understandings that enable nuclear possessors to present themselves as
                                                                                           responsible protectors. The nuclear success narrative reiterates knowledge about the military value
                                                                                           of nuclear weapons and conceals the humanitarian and environmental impacts of nuclear deto-
                                                                                           nations. Along with these stories, the dimension of play contributes to the ongoing dominance of
                                                                                           certain ways of understanding the nuclear world, as it downplays the seriousness of what is being
                                                                                           represented, while still serving as a powerful discursive tool that reinforces the extraordinary nature
                                                                                           of nuclear weapons.
                                                                                               With this, this article sought to contribute to understanding the mechanisms that make nuclear
                                                                                           weapons a persistent feature of global politics while inviting reflection on alternative frames that
                                                                                           can generate discontinuity of dominant discourses. There is a growing body of work that evaluates
                                                                                           the treatment of civilians in first-person shooters, and, as Neil Renic and Sebastian Kaempf sug-
                                                                                           gest, integrating a more nuanced understanding of the laws of war into this medium would help
                                                                                           challenge the idea that such rules cannot apply to the battlefield.110 Similarly, I would suggest that
                                                                                           the inclusion of alternative frames that explain and represent the humanitarian impact of nuclear
                                                                                           weapons111 would help challenge ideas that help legitimise nuclear possession. As Nick Robinson’s
                                                                                           work shows, while video games play an important part in militarism, they offer a potential space
                                                                                           for interrogating and challenging these understandings.112
                                                                                               Along with a burgeoning body of critical nuclear scholarship, this analysis calls for serious
                                                                                           engagement with everyday sites of knowledge production which remain crucial for making sense of
                                                                                           global politics as well as realising possibilities for policy innovation and change. While the nuclear
                                                                                           issue is closely associated with imperfect global governance institutions, exclusionary treaties,
                                                                                           (ir)responsible state actors, wars, and many other complicated processes and procedures, the more
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           obtuse forms of validating nuclear knowledge require our immediate attention. As such, I wonder
                                                                                           where else nuclear weapons are used in play and how many other children are playing the ‘nuke’
                                                                                           tag game.
                                                                                           Video abstract. To view the online video abstract, please visit: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087.

                                                                                           Acknowledgements. I am grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful comments and suggestions. I also sin-
                                                                                           cerely appreciate the support and encouragement of Thomas Gregory, Treasa Dunworth, Nicole Wegner, and Rhys Crilley
                                                                                           throughout the writing process. Additionally, I thank Benoît Pelopidas, Sterre Van Buuren, Hebatalla Taha, Laura Considine,
                                                                                           Jana Wattenberg, Catherine Eschle, Thomas Fraise, Shampa Biswas, and Jorge Hersschens for their insightful feedback on ear-
                                                                                           lier drafts. Finally, I am grateful to the participants of the Alva Myrdal Conference (2024) and the workshop on Theorizing
                                                                                           the Nuclear Age in International Relations, hosted by the Danish Institute for International Studies (2023), for their valuable
                                                                                           discussions. The materials used to produce the analysis are available at locations cited in the references section of this article.

                                                                                           Funding. Research for this article was supported by the ICAN Critical Nuclear Weapons Projects 2023–2024 and the UKRI
                                                                                           FLF Project ‘Atomic Anxiety in the New Nuclear Age’ (MR/X034690/1).
                                                                                              110
                                                                                                  Neil C. Renic and Sebastian Kaempf, ‘Modern lawfare: Exploring the relationship between military first-person shooter
                                                                                           video games and the “war is hell” myth’, Global Studies Quarterly, 2:1 (2022), pp. 1–11.
                                                                                              111
                                                                                                  The game ‘Spec Ops: The Line’, for example, depicts war from a critical perspective and has been designed to question
                                                                                           dominant assumptions about war and violence.
                                                                                              112
                                                                                                  Nick Robinson, ‘Militarism and opposition in the living room: The case of military videogames’, Critical Studies on
                                                                                           Security, 4:3 (2016), pp. 255–75.
                                                                                           706       Carolina Pantoliano


                                                                                           Dr Carolina Pantoliano is a research associate in Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament at the University of Glasgow. Before
                                                                                           starting at Glasgow in 2024, Carolina was a teaching fellow at the University of Auckland. Carolina holds a PhD in Politics and
                                                                                           International Relations from the University of Auckland. Her research interests include feminist, post-structuralist, and post-
                                                                                           colonial approaches to global politics, particularly international security, global governance, and norm dynamics. Carolina’s
                                                                                           work has appeared in leading academic journals such as International Affairs and Contemporary Security Policy. As a member
                                                                                           of the Atomic Anxiety in the New Nuclear Age team, Carolina works to deliver innovative research and impact on nuclear
                                                                                           politics and international security.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                           Cite this article: Carolina Pantoliano, ‘Playing doomsday: Video games and the politics of nuclear weapons’, Review of
                                                                                           International Studies, 51 (2025), pp. 686–706. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210525000087
